---
layout: default
title: Automation
nav_order: 2
parent: emuStudio Application
permalink: /application/automation
---

# Automation

Automation, or automatic emulation, is a feature in which user can run the emulation in a non-interactive mode, i.e. without any interruption. The emulation is being run from the command line and user just watches until it finishes. At the end, she/he collects logs and/or output files generated by plugins. Outputs then can be analyzed manually or by some custom script.

The feature has to be supported by individual plugins, so they will respect the settings from command line. Please refer to the documentation of individual plugins for these details.

Automatic emulation requires a source code to be present. The source code is called an "input". Example of running automatic emulation is as follows:

    ./emuStudio --auto --nogui --config config/MITSAltair8800.toml --input example.asm --waitmax 5000

Command line argument `--auto` turns on the automatic emulation. If no other argument is provided, emuStudio will start as usual by asking to open a virtual computer. But after this step it will run the emulation with the settings as they appear in the computer configuration file (no source code compilation is performed).

The `--nogui` argument tells to emuStudio that we don't want to use GUI (graphical user interface) at all. In that case, we must provide a virtual computer in the command line (using `--config`
argument).

Argument `--waitmax 5000` tells emuStudio that the emulation should not last for more than 5 seconds. If it didn't finish up to this deadline, it is forcibly stopped and marked as failed.

## Analyzing the results

An important part of the analysis of result of the automatic emulation is the log saying what happened. By default, each run of automatic emulation creates (overwrites) a log file called
`automation.log`, located in `logs/` directory.

The log file is in plaintext format and contains messages which appeared in log during the emulation.
The log file format can be customized, see "Logging" chapter for more details. 
